ABOUT
ASOCS Ltd. is a privately held company, develops and markets multi-core processors that enable software to program physical layer functions and algorithms. ASOCS is headquartered in Rosh Ha'ayin, Israel. The company provides solutions for C-RAN, multi-communication mobile devices, machine to machine (M2M) communication and the first responders homeland security markets.
FULL TEXT
ASOCS Ltd. is a privately held company, develops and markets multi-core processors that enable software to program physical layer functions and algorithms. ASOCS is headquartered in Rosh Ha'ayin, Israel. The company provides solutions for C-RAN, multi-communication mobile devices, machine to machine (M2M) communication and the first responders homeland security markets.


ASOCS was founded in 2003 by CEO Gilad Garon and CTO Doron Solomon, first as a vertically oriented provider of DSP ICs and associated software for handsets, and later became an IP provider focused on infrastructure gear.[1]
In 2012, the company has collaborated with wireless technologies developer InterDigital for a joint solution for 4G technologies.[2]
In February 2013, ASOCS have signed a strategic memorandum of understanding with China Mobile for the joint development, commercialization, testing and deployment of large-scale baseband processing units for China Mobile's next generation Cloud-RAN network.[3]
The ASOCS ModemX architecture is a silicon-based communication machine capable of modeling Modem and specifications. The ModremX cores can run distinctly different communication air-interfaces simultaneously on one platform and it can utilize interconnected grid of domain-specific Algorithmic Processing Units (APUs), controlled by a two-level control system that optimizes power consumption.
ASOCS’ CR2100 is a Scalable Baseband Unit IP MPU core, providing a PHY solution based on a CPU-MPU architecture for Small Cells and C-RAN systems.
MG101 is a Quad-Band GSM/GPRS/EDGE IP Solution optimized for integration as part of 3rd party SOC chip and includes Modem, L1 software and protocol stack. The MG101 is mostly used for Machine to Machine, Internet of Things and for legacy support to 4G capable chip sets.
Official website