ABOUT
LANDR is an online, cloud-based, automated mastering service developed by MixGenius in Montreal, QC. It allows for the upload of audio tracks in various formats which are then instantly digitally mastered using artificial intelligence algorithms . Free and paid services are offered.
FULL TEXT
LANDR is an online, cloud-based, automated mastering service developed by MixGenius in Montreal, QC. It allows for the upload of audio tracks in various formats which are then instantly digitally mastered using artificial intelligence algorithms . Free and paid services are offered.


Traditional audio mastering is done by one or more mastering engineers in a specialized mastering studio with analog and/or digital equipment. LANDR's mastering process, however, is completely automated through the use of algorithms based on automated mastering research performed at the Center for Digital Music (C4DM) at Queen Mary University of London.[1][2] It currently offers broad genre detection (performed automatically) to select a specific mastering style. The results of each mastering are used by the software to adjust the overall performance over time.[3]
LANDR currently only offers cloud-based mastering. User input is limited to coarse intensity selection however further customization is planned. LANDR accepts most audio formats of any size and length. Users upload the file to LANDR's servers which perform the mastering and prepare an output file for download. The free service offers 2 (two) Low-Res. 192k MP3 mastered downloads, while paid options are either 4 or unlimited uncompressed WAVs per month.
LANDR has won multiple awards within the music industry such as the Canadian Music Week Music Technovation Award in 2014, given to "companies that made a big impact on the art and business of music using technology in the past year."[4] LANDR was also one of the SF MusicTech Summit Startup Innovators Challenge winners as well as the Culture and Entertainment Technologies winner in the SXSW V2Venture competition.[5][6]